# S3 - Simple Storage Service
## Basics
- S3 is Object-based storage. Videos, photos, documents, etc. These are "flat files."
- It's not a place to store an OS or database. For that you need block-based storage.
- It's spread across multiple devices and facilities.
- Objects can be from 0 Bytes to 5 TB
- Unlimited storage
- Files are stored in buckets
- Universal namespace...names must be unique globally.
- Built for 99.99% availability
- Amazon guarantee 99.9% availability
- Amazon guarantee 99.99999999% durability information (11 9's)
- Tiered storage available
- Lifecycle management
- Encryption

## Data Consistency Model
- Read after write consitency for PUTS fo new Objects
-- Immediate consistency for objects put in S3 buckets.
- Eventual Consistency for overwrite PUTS and DELETES
-- These actions can take some time to propogate
- Updates are atomic
-- Will either get new or old data, but won't get corrupted or partial data

## Key-value store
- Key (name of the object)
-- S3 is lexigraphical - designed to sort objects by alphanumeric order
- Value
-- (data of the object)
- Version ID
-- Important for versioning
- Metadata
- Subresources
-- Access Control Lists (who can view - can do at bucket or file level)
-- Torrent

## Tiers / Classes
### S3
11 9's guarantee
Stored across multiple devices and facilities
Designed to sustain loss of 2 facilities concurrently

### S3 IA (Infrequently Accessed)
Data less frequently retrieved, assessed a fee for retrieving

### RRS (Reduced redundancy storage)
Desinged to provide 99.99% durability and 99.99% availability of objects over a given year

### Glacier
Cheap, but used for archival only

## Pricing
Charged for:
- Storage
- Requests
- Storage Management Pricing
- Data Transfer Pricing (free to store, but charged to move / replicate)
- Transfer acceleration (upload to edge location and from there to S3 datacenter)

## Static Hosting
You can host a static HTML site, automatically scale, etc. 
*You cannot do any server-side rendering or have any server-side code creating a dynamic site*

## Cross-origin Resource Sharing (CORS)
Allow javascript in one bucket to access objects in another bucket.
You can configure CORS origins from the bucket of the object you are trying to access.
*Be able to tell the difference between an S3 website URL vs an S3 bucket URL.*
You can make uploading much faster with multipart upload.
_Read the FAQ before taking examp_

## Permissions
Default permissions are private for objects in S3.

## Versioning

## Exam Tips
- Understand the format of bucket names
- Learn the format of an S3 object URL
- mimumum file size is 0 bytes
- maximum file size is 5 Tb
- maximum file size for a single PUT is 5 Gb



## Versioning
Once versioning is enabled, it can not be removed, only disabled.

Versioning shows one file, but there are N number of files. You don't want to add tons of large files into versioning, because the storage size will be proportionately large.

The object URL will always point to the latest version.

If you delete a bucket, you can't get it back, but you can restore objects.

To restore objects, he recommends using the old console. Go to the bucket, hit "show versions" and remove the delete marker.

_Find out how to restore objects from the new console, because the way he describes here isn't available anymore_

## Cross-Region Replication 
When you enable cross-region replication, only NEW objects will be replicated.
You have to enable versioning to have cross-region replication

Must replicate to a DIFFERENT region.

Deleting individual versions or delete markers will not be replicated.

Can't have cross-region replication daisy-chaining to multiple buckets.

## Security
By default, all buckets are private.
You can set up access controls via bucket policies, or access control lists.
S3 can be configured to log all requests.
By Default, all buckets and contents are private


### Encryption
Two types: In transit, and data at rest.
####In transit
SSL/TLS via HTTPS

####At Rest
Server-side encryption
Client-side encryption

#####Server-side
_At Rest_
SERVER SIDE
- S3 managed keys - SSE-S3 is AES 256
- AWS KMS managed keys. Similar to SSE-S3, but with some advantages and added costs.
- - Provides an audit trail of when keys were used and who used them. Also an option to create and manage encryption keys yourself.
- - Server-side encryption with customer-proviced keys. You manage encryption keys and Amazon manages encryption

#####Client-side
You encrypt before you upload to S3

## S3 Transfer Acceleration
Uses a distinct URL to transfer to an edge location, which will then upload to S3.

## Storage Gateway
A wervie that connects an on-premesis software applicane with cloud-badsed storage to provice seamless and secure integration between an organization's on premisis it shit blah blah blah. You install a virual appliance in a hypervisor on your data center, which asynchronously replicates your data to aws S3 or perhaps glacier.

#### File gateway (NFS)
Store flat files in S3
Files stored as objects in S3, once they're in S3 they become S3 objects
No files stored on premesis.

#### Volume gateways (iSCSI)
Virtual hard disks for block-based storage.
Presents your applications with disk volumes, can run os, databases etc. Virtual hard discs.
Can be backed up and stored in cloud as EBS snapshots
#####Stored valumes
Store entire copy locally and asynchronously back up to AWS. Data written to virtual HD is stored on own physical disc, then backs up to S3 in form of EBS snapshots.
You keep a complete copy of data on site. Complete copy is backed up incrementally to S3
#####Cached volues
Let you use S3 as primary data storage, while keeping frequently accessed data on premesis.
You can create storage volumes up to 32 TB in size, and attach them as iSCSI devices form your on-prem application servers.
##### Tape Gateway (VTL)
Virtual tapes sent to S3. Used for backup, uses popular applications like NetBackup, Backup Exec, Veam, etc.

## Snowball
Accelerates moving large amounts of data into cloud.
Used to be called import/export and required to send in physical discs to AWS.
Can import to S3 and export to S3 (not glacier)

### Snowball
Onboard storage. Petabyte-scale data transport solution. Like a data briefcase. Available in all zones.
### Snowball edge
100 Terrabytes, computing solution, like a little edge location data center that can run lambda functions, etc.
### Snowmobile
Petabyte or Exabyte level data storage. A freakin' truck.

###To copy:
`aws s3 cp --recursive {source} {target}`

